DNA  Extraction  From  Plants:  The Use of Pectinase

Materials  and  Methods 
1. Fresh or frozen leaf material (approximately  200  mg) is placed in a 2-mL microcentrifuge tube. Liquid nitrogen is added to the tubes and simultaneously used  to  cool a  plastic  grinding  rod. Once  thoroughly frozen, the tissue is ground to a fine powder (usually with 2-3 additions of flesh liquid nitrogen) note1. 
2. Then, 1.2 mL of modified CTAB (2X CTAB solution [Hillis et al., 1990; p.369] to which 0.010 mL 2-mercaptoethanol was added freshly just before use)  is  aliquotted onto the  still-frozen tissue. The grinding  rod  is used  to mix the tissue-CTAB solution thoroughly. 
3. Tubes are incubated in a 68C waterbath 12 h (overnight). 
4. Allow tubes to cool to room temperature. Add 0.4-0.6 mL chloroform and mix thoroughly. Spin at maximum speed in a microcentrifuge (approximately 12,000 rpm) and save the supernatant (aqueous layer) to a new tube note2. 
5. Precipitate the supernatant with 0.6 mL of 2-propanol. Mix thoroughly at room temperature. 
6. Spin tubes at maximum speed in a microcentrifuge tube, pouring off the supernatant. 
7. Dry the precipitate and add 0.1 mL of 15 mM EDTA (e.g., diluting a 500 mM stock solution made at pH 8) to which 0.0001 mL of ribonuclease A stock solution (10 mg/mL) has been added note3. 
8. Incubate 30 min in a 37C waterbath, or until the precipitate is hydrated, and add 0.02 mL modified pectinase solution (Sigma pectinase catalogue number P4716 [St. Louis, MO]; approximately 442 units pectinase per mL), which is made by using 97 parts of the supplied pectinase solution mixed with 3 parts of 500 mM EDTA (pH 8) stock solution. Incubate 6-12 h (overnight) until the DNA solution is watery (i.e., no longer viscous) note3. DNA extraction using pectinase 355. If the solution is still viscous, add 0.01 mL modified pectinase (97 parts: 3 parts as before) and incubate further as described in step 8. When digestion is complete enough (i.e., solution indistinguishable from water), add water to a total volume of 0.4 mL, and agarose gel purify as described in Rogstad (1993) with the following changes: run the minigel at ca. 45-50 mA for 30 rain, withdraw the solution remaining in the loading pockets, refill the pockets with running buffer (1 X TBE), and run the minigel at 45-50 mA for 15 rain. A clear band of genomic DNA should be evident under long-wave UV light (ethidium bromide is added to the gel solution just before pouring the gel) running slower than the contaminants. Cut the DNA band from the gel and digest the agarose with agarase according to the instructions from the supplier note4. 

Notes: 
1. The finer the grind, the greater the amount of DNA extracted. For  grinding rods, we use swizzle sticks (flat ball stirring rods - sword picks; Co-rect Products, Golden Valley, MN), using a branch cutter to create sharp ends that reach the bottom of the microcentrifuge tubes. The grinding rods are inserted in rubber stoppers (holed) for improved handling. Fresh grinding rods are used for each plant specimen to avoid cross-specimen DNA mixing. 
2. For plants yielding extreme amounts of contaminants that coprecipitate with the DNA, contamination can be greatly reduced by taking the following steps. Microcentrifuge the original extraction tube at full speed and discard the initial modified CTAB solution in which ground tissue has been incubating overnight (this discarded solution is termed the first DNA). Discarding the first DNA may be advantageous for some plants because a relatively large amount of pectinase may need to be added to achieve loss  of viscosity, but the DNA may degrade somewhat when exposed to such high pectinase concentrations. After discarding the first DNA, 1.2 mL of fresh modified CTAB is added to the pelleted tissue and the tubes are vortexed (for some plants, grinding the tissue pellet for 30 s with a new grinding rod improves yield, but vortexing appears to be just as effective) and incubated in a 68C waterbath for 1 h. Then proceed to step 4. This second extraction is termed the second DNA. Significant amounts of DNA can be obtained in a similar fashion by repeating these steps to extract the third DNA (pellet the tissue and remove the second DNA CTAB extraction solution to a new tube before adding chloroform to the second DNA; fresh modified CTAB then can be added to the pelleted tissue, which has never been exposed to chloroform). The CTAB solutions used to collect the second and third DNAs can be precipitated conveniently in the same tube, using a fresh aliquot of 2-propanol followed by centrifugation each time. Combining first and second, second and third, or all 3 DNAs significantly increases the DNA yield. For example, adding the third DNA to the second DNA may double the yield. 
3. The hydration solution includes EDTA, the purpose of which  is to inhibit the action of deoxyribonucleases (Junowicz and Spencer, 1973). These nucleases appear to occur in all of the pectinase preparations we tested (in addition to Sigma P4716, we tried CaylaseM3 [Rether et al., 1993: Cayla Sarl, Toulouse, France], Sigma P2401, Worthington LS004297 [Lakewood, NJ]), and in all of the pectolyase preparations tested (Y23 from Karlan, Santa Rosa, CA; Sigma P3026), as indicated by the finding that when each preparation was tested separately in DNA extraction trials with and without EDTA, the DNA always degraded when EDTA was not included (despite the description that Caylase is nuclease free; e.g., see Cayla Sarl literature). It also may  be possible to inhibit the deoxyribonucleases with actin (Lazarides and Lindberg, 1974), citrate (Davidson, 1972), lysine-EGTA (Liu and Wu, 1999), or SDS (Liao, 1975), although these have not yet been tested. For some plants, adding the modified pectinase initially with the hydration-ribonuclease solution increases DNA degradation, so hydration followed by addition of pectinase is recommended. The Sigma P4716 could be stored at 4C for at least 4 years without detectable loss of activity. Besides the decrease in viscosity accompanying the addition of pectinase, improved lessening of viscosity also was achieved by adding pectolyase (Y23 from Karlan; Sigma P3026). We also have tested alpha-amylase (Sigma A6380), pectinesterase (Sigma P0764), lysozyme (Sigma L6876), and tyrosinase (Sigma T7755), either alone or by adding each to pectinase treatments; little or no improvement was observed in the DNA extracted. Although difficult to quantify, casual observations suggested that rather than adding the 0.02 mL of modified pectinase solution in 1 aliquot, dividing it into 2 aliquots added separately, allowing at least 4 h for digestion after each addition, resulted in a less viscous solution. Extraction preparations that were precipitated with 2-propanol and rehydrated without any gel purification were compared with gel-purified DNA from the same species, and the former frequently failed to digest fully with comparable Taq I endonuclease treatment. Therefore, it is recommended that several individuals of the species of interest be extracted both with and without gel purification to determine whether 2-propanol precipitation alone can be used at this step. 