Extraction of nucleic acids from yeast cells and plant tissues using ethanol as medium for sample preservation and cell disruption

Tissue and cell disruption
1.	The ethanolic yeast suspension or the ethanol with the suspended plant material was aspirated or decanted from the zeolite beads. 
2.	For subsequent disruption of yeast cells, a mixture of 200 mg glass beads with a diameter of 0.25-0.5 mm and 10 glass beads with a diameter of 2.5 mm (Carl-Roth GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) were added. 
3.	For disruption of plant tissues, 200 mg cerium-stabilized zirconium oxide beads with a diameter of 0.4-0.6 mm and 10 cerium-stabilized zirconium oxide beads with a diameter of 2-2.4 mm (Muhlmeier GmbH & Co, Barnau, Germany) were enclosed. 
4.	The tubes were shaken in a horizontal position on a vortex mixer. 
5.	A Vortex L46 (Labinco BV, Breda, &e Netherlands) or a VortexGenie 2 (Scientific Industries, Bohemia, NY, USA) were used with suitable adapters at maximum speed. 
6.	Disruption of yeast cells was almost complete after 15 min. For plant materials, a disruption time of 1 h was applied.
7.	The homogenate could be easily separated from the large grinding beads by aspiration.

Extraction
1.	An aliquot (usually 100 or 200 (L) of the ethanolic homogenate was centrifuged, absolute ethanol was decanted, and the pellet was completely dried at room temperature. 
2.	Extraction of the dry cells or cell debris with a defined volume (usually 100 (L) of the solubilizing buffer (50 mM Na-EDTA, pH 7.5, 1.4% SDS) was carried out on the vortex shaker at room temperature for 15 min (standard treatment) or by using longer periods if indicated. 
3.	The volume ratio between the ethanolic homogenate and the solubilizing buffer could be increased up to 10-fold, if the dry weight concentration in the homogenate was low. 
4.	A ratio of 1 was suitable when the homogenate contained debris of yeast cells with a dry weight concentration of approximately 5 mg/mL or of plant tissues with a dry weight concentration of approximately 15 mg/mL. 
5.	To extract nucleic acids for purification of RNA by means of the guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol method (1), the homogenate pellet was solubilized in the sarcosyl buffer recommended for this method.